- So what we're talking
about today is isolating
parts of a muscle.
Get this topic all the time.
I can understand where it came from,
I understand why this is a
thing that people talk about
and I'm gonna explain
why it's not a thing.
I'm sure I will upset many individuals
who have based their life
off of training people
to isolate parts of the
muscle but you know,
sorry, it's not a thing.
So, speaking of upsetting people.
Last night's post that I made
on Instagram and on Facebook
was about pull ups and
I'll get to this first
'cause it actually dove tails
right into this conversation.
Hey Paul, how you doing?
Oh, David Fish is on
too, awesome, hey David.
So, when we talk about pull ups,
now the research shows
that there's more damage
in the shoulder joint with pull ups
than there are with rows.
Now, keep in mind how research works.
Also, Zack Salazar had a lot of problems
with what I said and
he's a really smart dude.
So I really wanna explain
from his perspective,
really why I believe this is a problem.
When a study is done...
And this is something
about scientific studies
where sometimes the
press will run away with
the wrong idea of what a study found
or they'll look at some
piece of data in the study
and not really fully
understand the conclusion
or maybe not wanna
and kind of intentionally misread it.
(clears throat)
When a study happens what
they do is they take one group
and they do one thing,
they take another group
and they do another thing
and then they compare the
data, what were the outcomes?
So they have a group of people
who have consistently
doing one or the other,
you know, one thing and
they have another group
doing the other thing.
So one group doing bent over rows,
another group doing pull ups,
and who had more
inflammation in the joint?
Often we don't have,
or let's say there's no
biomechanics specialist or
let's say these individuals
are unsupervised in the study.
And they go and often
they do their own thing.
Well here's the problem
when you do a pull up.
So, if I were to do a pull up
I would be about right here
at the top position.
The problem is when you lock out,
what happens is you have the opportunity
to pull your shoulder back
and sometimes people kip.
So they rock their body forward
and then use the momentum to bounce off
kind of the tendons and ligaments in here
and pull themselves back up,
and the swing of their body
to get 'em moved forward,
so they just kind of
pop back into position.
Well, your tendons and
ligaments are not rubber bands.
They're tissue that you need functioning
for the rest of your life.
And also, keep in mind
this joint right here,
this has the greatest range of motion
of any joint in the human body.
So...
Don't fuck it up.
You really have a lot of opportunity
to screw up your shoulder in your life.
So what I'm trying to
do is encourage people
to go the lower risk road
and still get the same
or even greater gains.
And so when I recommend the bent over row,
or when somebody says hey
should I throw in pull ups
and I go, yeah, yeah pull ups are okay.
But what you wanna make sure is that
you're doing something that is gonna have
the greatest reward and the lowest risk.
So, you can apply the same
thing to investing, right?
Anything you do in
life, it's like you want
a very high reward and a very low risk.
So when you do bent over row,
especially with variable
resistance with X3,
you're exhausting
different ranges of motion
as you go through the
diminishing range and protocol
and thereby stimulating a great
amount of muscular growth.
Now, I believe that relatively
exhausts the questions on this.
I will go back to questions afterward.
I saw you guys were
smiling about something,
did I miss a good question?
Is there a question?
No? Okay.
- No, Keith says,
"Nice work on this topic."
- Ah, thanks Keith.
So let's talk about
the falsehood of fitness of
isolating a part of a muscle.
So I'm gonna go with an obvious
outrageous example first
and then I'm gonna talk about
one that almost everybody
seems to be a fan of.
And then I'm gonna talk
about the clinical research
on the subject.
So all the time we hear
people talking about how,
let's say, one particular
physique star or athlete
will have an incredibly tall
peak on their bicep, right?
You'll see him do that and it just like,
wow they have a really tall peak.
And then so they're like, hey
I'm gonna right a program...
See if the people on Instagram,
they can see that, yeah.
So... (laughs)
What the question is
somebody has an amazing bicep
and they say, well, here's my
routine, here's how I did it.
And people think, okay
so what this guy did
is how to build a bicep of that shape.
And so, like Robby Robinson for example,
was a bodybuilder in the...
I think like even 60s, 70s and 80s.
He's still in shape.
(stammering) Animal, awesome
guy and a cool guy, I met him.
So what he would talk
about is outward rotation
while he does bicep work.
And that's how you build the peak
'cause it really focuses
on the outer head.
And having some training (sniffs)
in physiology and biomechanics,
your bicep shortens,
like the muscle shortens.
If that muscle is
shortening and it's doing so
in a way that your body recognizes
especially in a multi joint format
or a stabilization and
single joint format,
like if you're activating
your biceps via a bicep curl,
there's all kinds of
stabilization going on,
you do pick up things with your bicep
in a single joint manner
and have stabilization
going through your whole body
to attenuate the forward,
the sagittal abrupt loading.
And so there's all kinds of effect there
and hence the growth hormone
effect that we've seen.
Okay, so what would happen
was that Robby Robinson,
he had amazing biceps and
so people wanted to know
what his bicep routine was.
But here's the problem with that,
is the shape of a muscle is
like your fingerprint, right?
Thumbprint.
It was that way always, so because the guy
had an amazing shape of bicep,
whatever he did to make the muscle larger
made it seem like he did that
so that his bicep would grow
in a certain shape.
And the same thing with
Arnold Schwarzenegger.
How many, probably millions of people,
follow Arnold Schwarzenegger's program
because he had a bicep
which looked like an apple.
Like the tendon was over
here and it was really tall.
So you would just go, oh whatever he did
shaped it like that.
No, no, no, he was born with that.
And a monument to this is there's
a lot of people who try
to replicate that shape
and if they weren't born
with a bicep of that shape,
they didn't get that.
Now here's another example:
when people who have big separation
from upper to lower pectorals,
some people do and some people don't,
they end up writing a program
about separating upper pectorals.
Except you can't, that's
not how the muscle fires.
So here's a great study.
And very strong evidence.
Now I've said before,
electromyography is not everything,
but it does show activity.
So the idea you can
isolate a part of a muscle,
this is where electromyography
will be a good test.
So we would see based
on how much of a part
of a muscle is contracting.
So if we can do an exercise
like an incline bench press,
so you know you're pushing upward,
or downward for a decline
or for a straight bar
you're maybe getting a balance of both.
So they tested these different protocols
with bench press with 15 young men
who were doing repetitions
and they put electrodes
all over the pectorals.
And what they tried to
do is they did an incline
and a decline.
Because what had been said was a decline
is more for lower pectorals
and the incline is more
for upper pectorals.
Now by the way this came out in 1997,
and this has been a standard thing,
this is a very famous
study by Stephen Glass
and Ty Armstrong, two researchers.
And was published in the
National Strength Conditioning
Association journal,
the Journal of Strength
and Conditioning Research.
So, top world journal.
Great paper, went through peer review.
And so what they discovered was
there was no significant
difference in activity
between upper and lower pecs
no matter what they did.
So hence this is a falsehood of fitness,
and this shit just doesn't
seem to want to go away.
Like I've tried to tell people this,
you can't isolate a part of a muscle.
And I think people just
don't like that answer.
And so we're all victims at
times of confirmation bias.
Just look at how people
research political issues.
They search for something
that will give them
the answer they want,
not the answer that is.
When somebody says I wanna
grow my upper pectorals,
there are trainers out
there who truly believe
they're helping people
develop their upper pectorals.
And so here's one thing to point out,
if I push down and I look at
what my pectoral looks like,
it looks thicker on the bottom.
And if I push up like this,
it looks like my pectoral
is thicker at the top.
So it looks like it's more
contracted, but it isn't.
Like these things shorten.
And one of the most ludicrous
things I've seen recently
is building the inner pectoral,
which is, you know, not a thing.
I mean, that's not even muscle,
that's connective tissue.
Like it's where the muscle
comes into the sternum,
so (chuckles) that's not a thing.
Now if you do make your pectorals bigger,
you will have a thicker inner chest.
But you'll have a thicker
chest and whatever shape,
what you were born with, like a thumbprint
is how it's gonna look.
Now some people have no idea
what the shape of a muscle is.
And if they're carrying
around a significant
amount of body fat and
they have an underdeveloped
muscle under there, so you know,
what are you gonna look like
when you're totally lean?
Well, there's only one way to find out
and that's get totally lean.
Fantastic study again,
Glass and Armstrong, 1997
Journal of Strength and
Conditioning Research.
I said I would only bore
you guys with one reference,
one piece of academic research
per one of these videos
and I did that.
Let's open it up for questions.